Source: Vikaspedia
Country: India
Title: Critical factors to be considered for selection of crops

Agricultural   Universities,   Research   Institutes,    Krishi  Vigyan  Kendras  have  been  generating  ample  technologies  to  improve  the  productivity  and  profitability  of  the  farmers. However, knowledge gap is prevailing among farmers and those who  have access to knowledge harvest better profits.

Key requirements for improving productivity

Increase  in  productivity  and  profitability  can  be   achieved through:

Blending practical knowledge with scientific  technologies

Efficient use of natural resources

Adopting time specific management practices

Giving priority for quality driven production

Adopting suitable farming systems

Adoption of location specific technology

Market demand driven production

Adopting low cost and no cost technologies

Factors influencing decisions on  the selection of crops & cropping  system

Farmers need to answer all the below questions while making decisions for choosing a crop/ cropping pattern. During this decision making process, farmers cross check the suitability of proposed crop/cropping systems with their existing resources and other conditions. Thereby, they justify choosing or rejecting a crop/cropping systems. This process enables the farmers to undertake a SWOT analysis internally which in turn guides them to take an appropriate decision.

Climatic factors

- Is the crop/cropping system suitable for local weather  parameters  such  as  temperature,  rainfall,  sun   shine hours, relative humidity, wind velocity, wind  direction, seasons and agro-ecological situations?

Soil conditions

- Is  the  crop/cropping  system  suitable  for  local  soil   type, pH and soil fertility?

Water

Do you have adequate water source like a tanks,  wells, dams, etc.?

Do you receive adequate rainfall?

Is  the  distribution  of  rainfall  suitable  to  grow   identified crops?

Is the water quality suitable?

Is electricity available for lifting the water?

Do  you  have  pump  sets,  micro  irrigation  systems?

Cropping system options

Do  you  have  the  opportunity  to  go  for  inter-cropping,    mixed    cropping,    multi-storeyed     cropping, relay cropping, crop rotation, etc.?

Do  you  have  the  knowledge  on  cropping  systems management?

Past and present experiences of   farmers

What  were  your  previous  experiences  with  regard to the crop/cropping systems that you are  planning to choose?

What  is  the  opinion  of  your  friends,  relatives   and  neighbours  on  proposed  crop/cropping   systems?

Expected profit and risk

How  much  profit  are  you  expecting  from  the   proposed crop/cropping system?

Whether  this  profit  is  better  than  the  existing   crop/cropping system?

What  are  the  risks  you  are  anticipating  in  the   proposed crop/cropping system?

Do you have the solution?

Can you manage the  risks?

Is it worth to take the risks for anticipated profits?

Economic conditions of farmers   including land holding

Are  the  proposed  crop/cropping  systems  suitable for your size of land holding?

Are your financial resources adequate to manage the proposed crop/cropping system?

If  not,  can  you  mobilize  financial  resources   through alternative routes?

Labour availability and mechanization  potential

Can  you  manage  the  proposed  crop/cropping   system through your family labour?

If not, do you have adequate labours to manage  the same?

Is  family/hired  labour  equipped  to  handle  the   proposed crop/cropping system?

Are there any mechanization options to substitute the labour?

Is machinery available? Affordable? Cost effective?

Is  family/hired  labour  equipped  to  handle  the   machinery?

Technology availability and suitability

Is the proposed crop/cropping system suitable?

Do  you  have  technologies  for  the  proposed   crop/cropping system?

Do  you  have  extension  access  to  get  the  technologies?

Are   technologies   economically   feasible   and    technically viable?

Are technologies complex or user-friendly?

Market demand and availability of  market infrastructure

Are the crops proposed in market demand?

Do you have market infrastructure to sell your  produce?

Do you have organized marketing system to reduce the intermediaries?

Do  you  have  answers  for  questions  such  as   where  to  sell?  When  to  sell?  Whom  to  sell  to?   What form to sell in? What price to sell for?

Do  you  get  real  time  market  information  and   market intelligence on proposed crops?

Policies and schemes

Do Government policies favour your crops?

Is there any existing scheme which incentivises  your crop?

Are you eligible to avail those benefits?

Public and private extension influence

Do you have access to Agricultural Technology  Management Agency (ATMA)/ Departmental  extension functionaries to get advisory?

Do you know Kissan Call Center?

Do you have access to KVKs, Agricultural Universities and ICAR organizations?

Do you subscribe agricultural magazines?

Do  you  read  agricultural  articles  in  newspapers?

Do you get any support from input dealers, Agribusiness  Companies,  NGOs,  Agriclinics  and   Agribusiness Centers?

Availability of required agricultural  inputs including agricultural credit

Do you get adequate agricultural inputs such as  seeds, fertilizers, pesticides, and implements in  time?

Do you have access to institutional credit?

Post harvest storage and processing  technologies

Do you have your own storage facility?

If not, do you have access to such facility?

Do you have access to primary processing facility?

Do you know technologies for value addition of  your crop?

Do  you  have  market  linkage  for  value  added   products?

Are you aware about required quality standards  of value added products of proposed crops?

Source :

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture